The promise that Blumenstock sees within the world of data science in regards to international human development is evident in the myriad of ways that this data can be used to aid individuals and societies struggling with poverty. For example, implementing the machine-learning algorithms in order to allow those without access to a bank or other financial service to acquire credit scores and loans. The use of technology in this way also has the potential to revolutionize how humanitarian aid is distributed, allowing for increased effectiveness in not only this area but also in providing relief during the times of an epidemic or natural disaster. Blumenstock also recognizes past and potential obstacles that would come in the way of allowing data science to transform human development in the ways previously mentioned if not addressed. One of these is that these new advances may just help those who are already empowered rather than the less fortunate people that these efforts are aimed towards because there would be only a few powerful individuals tasked with the ability to use this data in a way that is valuable. Furthermore, in developing nations, if credit scores are assessed and loans are immediately sent this could lead to more poverty, with many individuals not understanding fully what the loans entail. As he rightly points out, those most in need of aid are the least digitally represented. Lastly, Blumenstock emphasizes that these new approaches may not be adequately tested and thus may become less accurate over time. His way forward entails ensuring that data privacy is upheld, and, he believes that the true key to success in this science is the collaborative effort between not only data scientists but also between governments and the people themselves. 
I believe that the point made about good intent is a very valid one as it relates to human development and data science. One's livelihood and the line between poverty and potential growth cannot be left to merely the feeling of wanting to do good. Ensuring that accurate testing of technological algorithms occurs and that people do not abuse the system is truly what matters most in making a difference and will turn good intent into truly good deeds. I also highly agree with the idea of needing full transparency if this step towards bettering human development is to occur. Ensuring that individuals know exactly the consequences of all actions happening to them in attempting to help is crucial, as is remembering that people are entitled to have their own privacy even technologically.  Finally, the balancing act ties everything together in emphasizing the essential focus on both the difficulties and benefits that this type of data produces. This will truly allow effective advances in human development to occur via data science.

