After reviewing both Selim Jahan's podcast on redefining the boundaries of human development and Hans Rosling's emphasis on the necessity of health improvements over immediately pursuing economic growth, it is evident that the purpose of both of the speeches was to bring a new perspective on the global improvements that could occur through expanding the boundaries of what human development is defined by. Jahan focused specifically on a few issues when looking at what currently requires our primary focus in terms of global human development. Firstly, he addresses the importance of continuing to support the field of agriculture. While he acknowledges the importance of urbanization, he rightly emphasizes that the majority of the world is employed in rural/agricultural jobs, and that this fact cannot be ignored if we strive to make substantial changes in development in the future. Additionally, he believes in supporting and acknowledging the economic effects of the informal sector, or those working “under the table” jobs that are not typically recognized by the government. Turning a blind eye to the economic boost that these businesses provide would prevent a true understanding of the economic status of a given nation. Furthermore, he believes in the importance of younger generations being employed and joining the workforce. Overall, Jahan’s main takeaway in defining human development as providing more choices in all areas of life is that people’s concept of “work” should extend beyond jobs to also include volunteer work, societal duties and post-crisis relief, all necessary aspects of human prosperity. Jahan's overarching thesis also touches on the influential Human Development Index, which incorporates the idea of defining achievement through the extent to which people are experiencing a long and healthy life, receiving knowledge, and having a decent overall standard of living. 
In his talk, Rosling emphasizes a few circumstances where improvements in health preceded economic wealth. One example he mentions is China, noting that Mao Zedong brought health to China before Deng Xiaoping transformed the country into one of wealth. In another case, he touches on the United Arab Emirates, stating that Sheikh Sayed brought tremendous growth to the country in terms of health through multiple means such as increasing training for health professionals, despite issues with decreases in oil prices. Rosling advises against using averages when assessing human development by nation because in certain cases, such as in Sub-Saharan African, many countries have a huge disparity between the development of the richest 20% and poorest 20%.
In summation, both Jahan and Rosling challenge common misconceptions of what human development "should be" defined by, and provide new perspectives on what human development can become if transformed and applied to areas of life beyond purely income.
