# Geospatial Data Methods in Investigating Food Insecurity and Poverty in Rwanda

## Cover Letter

To Whom It May Concern,

Rwanda is currently experiencing a great deal of suffering and skyrocketing rates of food insecurity and poverty, devastating the nation as whole. My proposition to combat this issue is to implement a transfer-learning model which is able to accurately identify household indicators of poverty in order to understand where aid is most needed so it can be distributed most effectively. In order to do this, change is required now in the form of a legal policy that will expand data sharing and public access to spatial data in Rwanda. With the influx of resources we have today, allowing spatial data to become public would allow for the proposition of new geospatial models that have not even been thought of yet. Doing so will immensely help the currently human development issues within this nation and allow for a decreased mortality rate and life expetancy to increase above 50 years. I urge you to consider this proposition as it will be the key to eradicating poverty in Rwanda and will save thousands of lives along the way. 

Sincerely, 

Anastasia Mavrakis 

## Problem Statement 

An evolving problem in East Africa has been increasing poverty rates which have subsequently led to a spike in child mortality, and this problem is seen at its highest peak in Rwanda, the most densely populated nation in the entire continent. The inherent harms of these facts are seen daily- households are unable to acquire basic nutritional needs and the most children fall victim to malnutrition. In a study analyzed previously, it was even determined that a majority of children between the ages of 1-2 do not even meet the minimal dietary diversity that is necessary for a growing infant. As Rwanda has a largely agricultural-based society and economy, already scarce resources become even more unpredictable as a result of an ever evolving climate and stark changes in precipitation annually. In Rwanda in particular, it is crucial to identify the inherent interconnectedness of poverty and food insecurity in order to properly tackle this aspect of human development. As it stands currently, there is a gap in the literature in terms of data sharing. Census data in Rwanda is old and out-dated and surveys aren’t conducted as often as they should be, making the implementation of some transfer learning models and possible aid relief efforts more difficult. When beginning to research the effects of food insecurity, and consequently malnutrition in Rwanda, it became quickly evident that this topic is inherently linked to the unusually high poverty rate in Rwanda, and thus, these two concepts must be viewed through the same lens. Rwanda is the most densely populated nation in all of Africa, and with more refugees pouring into the country yearly, the completely agricultural society is struggling to maintain an adequate amount of resources to support everyone. With a population density of 1,360 people per square mile, the mortality rate as a result of poverty has skyrocketed, particularly among children, and the average life expectancy does not exceed 50 years. The significance of these harms is that as the economy is agriculturally-based, the means of living has been based upon the growth of crops, which has proven to be detrimental, particularly as climate patterns become increasingly unpredictable. Thus, food sources have been unreliable nationwide. Analyzing this dimension of human development draws a parallel to Amartya Sen’s definition of freedom, which defines human development as the expansion of the freedoms and opportunities that citizens have in all areas of life, whether that is political, economic, or, in this case, freedom from poverty. Having such limited resources and being subjected to a life of poverty creates a sort of metaphorical trap, where opportunities are not able to be pursued as most if not all members of the family must work tirelessly to provide the most basic necessities for their family, which are still not guaranteed at the end of the say. Facing the issue of poverty and food insecurity head-on in Rwanda is the first step towards true development in this developing country, and grants the citizens of Rwanda a small piece of freedom in and of itself. When looking at the SDGs that this research relates to, the goals that most closely align to this topic are numbers one and two, which are to end poverty and end hunger, respectively. SDG #1 focuses on the necessity for stable jobs and economic equality, while SDG #2 centers more around how the agricultural sector can grow, both aligning with the prominent issues in Rwanda. As previously mentioned, one of the biggest obstacles plaguing the nation today, and much of Eastern Africa, is a lack of reliable, consistent, and easily accessible information about spatial data and census counts. In an effort to combat this, and develop useful geospatial data that can be utilized as an effective way to distribute humanitarian aid, multiple studies have been conducted to propose new data science methods of tackling these issues. Some of the most prominent ones that will be discussed further are using GIS to analyse household indicators of poverty, deep learning models, and call detail records, to touch on a few. In combination with this, survey data, particularly of hospitals and households, has shown to provide essential details in the fight against food insecurity and widespread poverty in Rwanda. 
The research question I have proposed is “How can household indicators of poverty be analyzed to increase the effectiveness of poverty and hunger relief efforts in Rwanda?”. I believe that this question falls into the descriptive inquiry category as my data science methods seek to establish a profile of sorts of households in Rwanda and how specific demographic information and certain socioeconomic factors are patterns among families, and thus how they subsequently contribute to the rising poverty rate in the nation as a whole. In order to understand how this area of human development affects people in Rwanda, starting with households rather than attempting to look at the entire economy as a whole may reveal far more about the standard of living than even official census data can provide. 
	The first geospatial data method that shows promise introduces the use of spatial data through maps in order to visually communicate patterns in household living standards (HLS) in the city of Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. The data used maps of district and sector boundaries in combination with a database of Integrated Living Condition Survey results that centered on three particular dimensions (health, access to services, and education) of HLS. Then the ArcGIS 9.3 software package is used in order to transform all spatial data for the mapped out districts and zones into vector format. From there, the data from these zones were represented in GIS as centroid points, and the Inverse Distance Weighting method of interpolation was implemented. For the maps themselves, a diverging color classification scheme was used to emphasize median critical values as well as extremes. Another methodology implements the idea of transfer learning which utilizes a proxy for poverty in order to teach a deep learning model. From there the model estimates average household wealth and expenses at the lowest level (the cluster level) of geographic aggregation for which data can be determined through public surveys. The model uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) that has been trained on ImageNet and the trained CNN condenses the input images into lower-dimensional sets of image features that predict variation. Thus, the CNN can be utilized to extract features and learn nonlinear mapping from each input into a specific vector representation. 


## Literature Review

When analyzing food insecurity in Rwanda, one of the key aspects that must be looked at is the agricultural state of the country and how certain models can predict agricultural productivity and crop potential. In the article published by Muhire, the model developed was used in order to predict crop yields as well as future climate patterns, such as changes in precipitation. Annual variability in rainfall can account for up to 30% of crop yield fluctuations on a global scale, but when looking solely at Rwanda, which has a much smaller crop input and bases agricultural growth solely on rain, climate changes can account for up to 80% of the variability in annual crop yields. Furthermore, aridity is even more common in Rwanda since the nation already has a decreased water supply. Thus, what Muhire did was develop a model that utilized climate data from 2000-2010 as well as a stochastic weather generator from the Rwandan Meteorological Center which calculated the average temperature and precipitation for the years 2000-2050 in order to predict the future crop yields for 2011-2050. In addition, this data could be implemented to see how suitable certain major crops would be for growth in the future. [7] In addition to this, Benimana’s study focused on using a spatial water balance technique which was used to analyze the potential for harvesting rainwater to use when producing crops, and thus forming plans to increase food security in the Bugesera District, a very arid and drought-prone part of Rwanda. They determined the amount of water runoff (a proxy for rainwater), which could then be collected, by using the Natural Resources Conservation Service Curve Number method. [5] 
Another core aspect apart from the agriculture side of food insecurity and poverty in Rwanda is using what Akinyemi calls Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategies (EDPRS). By using GIS-based images of poverty, indicators of poverty (education status, etc.) visualized cartographically can be used in combination with geographic information in order to find the sources of poverty and target them directly. [2] In another one of Akinyemi’s studies, titled “A Conceptual Poverty Mapping Data Model”, she mentions the fact that while GIS is increasingly being used in poverty mapping, there is no generic database model for the development of databases. She argues that while there are already industry-specific models, having a generic one would make the incorporation of spatial data in assessments of poverty far less complex. The underlying goal would be for a level of standardization to arise for the most commonly used data types, which would allow the sharing of spatial data between multiple poverty aid efforts. [1]
One of the most fascinating approaches to predicting poverty is detailed in the study written by Jean, where the key concept is using satellite images in order to compare landscape features with economic data. The proposed process is to use a transfer learning model, which would start with a convolutional neural network (CNN) model that was trained on ImageNet. From there, the CNN would be able to perform nonlinear mapping from each input image to a precise vector representation. [6] Another significant spatial data source are CDRs, which are used in Njuguna’ study on big data. Njuguna emphasizes the cost and labor efficiency of CDRs, and proposes to utilize features that are representative of socioeconomic status as proxies, which are then statistically analyzed and aggregated at the sector level to match the spatial resolution of the true value, or, the MPI. Though this does focus primarily on a statistical analysis, using the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) or ridge regression prior to the final model, the efficiency of such a model should be recognized in the context of Rwanda’s human development progress. [9]

	The resulting data when looking at the various proposed spatial models each showed their own slightly unique take on how to best deal with this specific aspect of human development. On the agricultural front, Muhire’s study revealed that the future precipitation is likely to fluctuate more than temperatures will, which will remain relatively stagnant with the exception of temperatures in areas of high altitudes. Thus, carefully analyzing what those future rainfall patterns will be is essential in understanding which crops should be produced, as a way of maximizing food intake in order to decrease food insecurity. [7] In Benimana’s study, the dataset used was land cover data that was obtained from digital LANDSAT images, and the results found that the average runoff daily was 880 x 106 m3. To put this into perspective, utilizing this excess water could produce up to 531 x 103 tons of paddy rice and 1,620 x 103 tons of corn, which is an extreme difference in such an agriculturally-based economy, where maximizing crop yields in this way could revolutionize the standard of living. [5]
	When reviewing Akinyemi’s GIS-based approach, her study utilized the ArcGIS 9.3 software package to map the data for this study and to integrate all spatial data obtained into vector formats, the household living standards analyzed being household health, education, and accessibility to services. These indicators of poverty are then able to be used to map their frequency and distribute aid where it is most necessary. [2] In her other idea of developing a standard, generic model for poverty mapping, she touches on the key thematic layers of what data that model would need to have. This includes administrative and census boundaries, environmental factors, transportation pathways, geographical names, infrastructure, and lastly, land boundaries. In said model, data would be aggregated to aid the management of geographical activities, so an entity could be represented in multiple corresponding spatial entities. For example, a city in a small-scale database could be a point, and the same city could also be a polygon in a large-scale database. [1]
	With the transfer learning model, the results yielded by the CNN revealed that this model was able to extremely accurately predict average household consumption and wealth across multiple African countries, which would allow aid efforts to be implemented where they are needed most. [6] In a different approach, Stöcker focuses on a different tool for acquiring land tenure data: Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS). Thus, a socio-technical study was conducted in Rwanda and aimed to evaluate the workflow of UAS and the final products of valuable spatial data to be used for land administration and spatial planning. Three UAS were flown to examine the quality of the data and how this technology would work in the current institutional environment. The results were that UAS can contribute to match the prioritized needs in Rwanda but the current capacity conditions do not have the sufficient potential. [10]
	Another core aspect of data science methods is survey data. In the study of dietary diversity scores among children, hospitals conducted surveys in order to determine what the children had eaten in the past day, which revealed an overwhelming lack of diversity in food groups. The results were grouped by age, and revealed that the median dietary diversity score for children between the ages of 6-12 months was a 2 out of the possible 7 and for children between 13-23 months old, this score rose to 4, the minimum dietary diversity score, just further showing the reality of food insecurity in Rwanda. [8] Habyarimana also conducted a survey-based study, where household survey data was collected in order to reveal significant indicators of poverty. The results were that the age of the household head, education level of the household head, gender of the household head, place of residence, the province of household head and size of the household (number of household members) were the most significant predictors of poverty in Rwanda. [4]
	Lastly, it is important to mention Akinyemi’s assessment of how spatial data is currently shared in Rwanda. She first emphasizes the importance of accessible geographic information, and how it transforms the economy and the effectiveness of businesses in the private sector, increasing citizen’s involvement in governance. An assessment of data sharing was conducted in Rwanda, where organizations that produced or used spatial datasets were surveyed. The results were that the dominant shared datasets were administrative boundaries and topographic maps, where most spatial data was exchanged through printed maps. Additionally, those using and producing data in Rwanda believe the key to data sharing in Rwanda is that there must be a national policy on the access and sharing of data. [3]
	Overall, there are many proposed data methods for how to revolutionize human development in Rwanda, in particular how to address the significant issues of poverty and food insecurity. My progress thus far has been narrowing down the most promising and well-supported data science models, and as I continue I hope to narrow it down even further to compare the models, such as the benefits of ArcGIS analysis versus a transfer learning model. I do believe a gap in the literature exists, as Akinyemi mentioned that there is still very limited public access to a majority of spatial information. Making more of this information publicly accessible is how I believe that the gap will be closed and even more models can be proposed to find a solution for Rwanda’s struggles with food insecurity and poverty.

## Research Proposal
	
Geographic information has become increasingly important and valuable in modern day data science explorations as well as everyday life. It’s influence is vast and far-reaching and can even lead to changes in the economy. This information is especially useful in boosting the effectiveness of businesses in the private sector, which allows for more public influence in the government, aiding the voice of the people. The need to share becomes evident when individuals and organisations are unable to produce all of the datasets they need. Analyzing current data sharing arrangements is crucial to understanding where the gap exists currently. An assessment of data sharing in Rwanda was made by conducting surveys of organisations producing or using spatial datasets in their daily activities.Key areas covered included which organisational approaches were used and obstacles to spatial data sharing. Much of the focus centered on the main spatial data producers since they exert a large influence on the data sharing process. Overall, the main datasets shared are administrative boundaries, topographic maps and orthophotos. Additionally, most spatial information is exchanged via printed maps, demonstrating that the data management system is mainly paper-based. Furthermore, findings show that the majority of data users in Rwanda are prominent political figures or government decision-makers. Data producers and users alike have noticed the absence of a national policy on data access and sharing, and state that this is the main issue preventing effective data sharing in Rwanda. Based on survey findings, different data sharing policy options have been proposed, and this is where my research proposal plan comes in. 
In a study conducted in Rwanda, institutions were categorised into four groups: spatial data provider, spatial data user, spatial data provider and user, spatial data value-adder. For further background, spatial data producers include primary producers and those that produce new data and products as a result of analyzing data. The spatial data user category consists of individuals or institutions that use spatial data. Spatial data producers can also be users when they require datasets produced by other institutions for their own use. The results of the survey of these four organizations revealed that more than 40% of the organisations describe themselves as spatial data providers and users, over 20% see themselves as spatial data providers, users and value adders, others are simply spatial data users (over 20%), and the minority (5%) are spatial data users and value adders, value adders being those that focus on the application of spatial analysis. 
These results as well as the known fact that data is not publicly accessible reveal that there is certainly a monopoly on who gets to access data in Rwanda. My proposal is twofold. One, based off of Akinyemi’s claim, is to create a standard generic database that is easily accessible between multiple organizations and relief efforts. Additionally, I believe that a legal policy to promote the accessibility of data and the ability to share it would be vastly beneficial to Rwanda, as many citizens have called for this in the past.


## References
1. Akinyemi, F. (2010). A conceptual poverty mapping data model. Transactions in GIS, 14, 85-100. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9671.2010.01207.x

2. Akinyemi, F., & Bigirimana, F. (2012). A spatial analysis of poverty in KIGALI, Rwanda using indicators of household living standard. KIST Journal of Science and Technology.

3. Akinyemi, F., & Uwayezu, E. (2011). An Assessment of the Current State of Spatial Data Sharing in Rwanda. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 6, 365-387.

4. Habyarimana, Zewotir, & Ramroop. (2015). Analysis of demographic and health survey to measure poverty of household in Rwanda. African Population Studies, 29.

5. J, C. B., U, G. W., I, N., F, O. K., & W, G. (2015). Rainwater harvesting potential for crop production in the BUGESERA District of Rwanda. African Journal of Agricultural Research, 10(19), 2020-2031. doi:10.5897/ajar12.820

6. Jean, N., Burke, M., Xie, M., Davis, W. M., Lobell, D. B., & Ermon, S. (2016). Combining satellite imagery and machine learning to predict poverty. Science. doi:10.1126/science.aaf7894

7. Muhire, I., Ahmed, F., Abutaleb, K., & Kabera, G. (2015). Impacts of projected changes and variability in climatic data on major food crops yields in Rwanda. International Journal of Plant Production.

8. N., D., K.V., R., J., M., & Sharma, A. (2018). The study of dietary diversity score in children between 6 months to 23 months: A hospital based study. International Journal of Contemporary Pediatrics. http://dx.doi.org/10.18203/2349-3291.ijcp20181541

9. Njuguna, C., & McSharry, P. (2017). Constructing spatiotemporal poverty indices from big data. Journal of Business Research. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.005

10. Stöcker, C., Ho, S., Nkerabigwi, P., Schmidt, C., Koeva, M., Bennett, R., & Zevenbergen, J. (2019). Unmanned aerial System Imagery, land data and user needs: A Socio-Technical assessment in Rwanda. Remote Sensing, 11(9), 1035. doi:10.3390/rs11091035

